---
title: "Home VPN, pt. 1: A Basic Setup"
tags: [network, computers]
---
{% assign img_laptop = "/assets/2022-07-19/laptop.jpg" | absolute_url %}
So right before I left for my trip to Florida I realized that there was no way to access my
home network remotely. This was a bit of a sitch, so now that I'm back, I'm finally going to make one.

This can be done in two ways, and I'm thinking of doing the former:
- Create a jail/container on my NAS machine, host it there
- Set up another device and have it on bare metal

While writing this, I tried doing all of this via a TrueNAS jail, but jails were missing features that I needed
for configuring and running a VPN. Luckily, I have a bunch of laptops laying around that I can install
OpenBSD on.

{% include md/figure.html src=img_laptop figcaption="An old ACER Aspire that I installed OpenBSD 7.1 onto" width="100%" height="75%" %}

I basically followed [Mental Outlaw's guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szGsh5J9bzY) on hosting a 
WireGuard VPN on OpenBSD, but the steps are as follows:

#### VPN Server
1. I installed OpenBSD on my laptop, gave it a static IP, etc. I don't believe having the IP be
dynamic would actually cause any issues, but it would be easier to configure on a static IP.

2. Allow ip forwarding. This needs to be put in `/etc/sysctl.conf` for it to be persistent across reboots, apparently.
    ```conf
    net.inet.ip.forwarding=1
    machdep.lidswitch=0 # Needed to disable suspend on lid close
    ```

3. Install WireGuard and generate a keypair. Luckily, WireGuard has utilities for generating keys.
    ```
    # wg genkey > private.key
    # wg pubkey < private.key > public.key
    ```

4. Configure WireGuard. WireGuard doesn't have a default config, but this should be enough to get it started.
    ```
    [Interface]
    ListenPort = ******
    PrivateKey = ******************************************** # Server private key
    
    [Peer]
    PublicKey = ******************************************** # Client public key
    AllowedIPs = ***.***.***.***/**
    PersistentKeepalive = ***
    ```

5. Configure pf/firewall. I think I only need to add the following 3 lines:
    ```
    pass in on wg0
    pass in inet proto udp from any to any port ***** # This port is the same as the listen port
    pass out on egress inet from (wg0:network) nat-to (bge:0)
    ```
   In the video, he's using a Vultr VPS, which seems to have `vio0` as the default interface.
   From my `ifconfig`, I believe that my device is `bge0`.

6. Configure the VPN ip settings. This is put into `/etc/hostname.wg0`.
    ```
    inet xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx NONE # ip addr and netmask
    up
    !/usr/local/bin/wg setconf wg0 /etc/wireguard/wg0.conf
    ```
From here, I can simply start up the `wg0` device with
    ```
    # sh /etc/netstart wg0
    ```
and it should start accepting connections to the VPN.

#### VPN Client
Configuration for the client is about the same, but I configured via `systemd-networkd`, so I used networkd-unit files.
1. Generate wireguard keypar.
2. Created the WireGuard net device. The configuration is basically the same, just an added `NetDev` header. 
`Interface` info now goes under `WireGuard` and `Peer` info now goes under `WireGuardPeer`.
    ```
    [NetDev]
    Name=wg0
    type=wireguard
    Description=WireGuard tunnel
    
    [WireGuard]
    PrivateKey=******************************************** # Client private key

    [WireGuardPeer]
    PublicKey=******************************************** # Server public key
    Endpoint=***.***.***.***:****** # Server public IP and wireguard listening port
    AllowedIPs=***.***.***.***/*** # Allowed IPs and netmasks, you can use wildcards
    ```
3. Added the associated network configuration. 
    ```
    [Match]
    Name=wg0
    
    [Network]
    Address=***.***.***.***/***
    ```

Now I can just reload `systemd-networkd` and it should connect. I can successfully ping to the VPN server, but I can't route the internet through it. I'll have to figure out that another time.
