---
title: "Luthery Log 1: Starcaster Build"
tags: [art, woodworking, guitar, makerspace]
---
{% assign img_riviera = "/assets/2022-07-25/riviera.jpg" | absolute_url %}
{% assign img_starcaster = "/assets/2022-07-25/starcaster.jpg" | absolute_url %}
{% assign img_split = "/assets/2022-07-25/split.jpg" | absolute_url %}
{% assign img_sled = "/assets/2022-07-25/sled.jpg" | absolute_url %}
{% assign img_prototype = "/assets/2022-07-25/prototype.jpg" | absolute_url %}
{% assign img_top = "/assets/2022-07-25/top.jpg" | absolute_url %}

I have had this dream: to own some kind of semi-hollow guitar of my own making.

<br>

{% include md/figure.html src=img_riviera width="100%" height="38%" figcaption="A wine red Epiphone Riviera P93" %}

At first, it was going to be an Epiphone Riviera P93, partially because this dream started when I was
in high school: I was getting into The Strokes, and Nick Valensi's P94 was something I've always wanted to own. 
However, it didn't feel like my style, and so my dream settled on this wine red P93, with its beautiful gold hardware
and triple dogear P90 setup. Tonewise, it was bright and airy due to the single coil setup and semi-hollow body,
but the tone could also fatten up with the right settings. I found out recently Lucy Dacus also uses it, which
had further set this guitar as something of a dream to acquire.

<br>

{% include md/figure.html src=img_starcaster width="100%" height="40%" figcaption="Fender's Modern Player Starcaster in Cherry Red Sunburst"%}

However, I had also begun getting into Deep Sea Diver at the same time, and the lead guitarist Jessica Dobson always
rocked this cherry sunburst semi-hollow guitar that I had never seen the likes of before. Research had me find out that
it was a Fender Modern Player Starcaster, and my mind had fixated on this guitar as well. Something about the stylings of
a Fender in a semi-hollow guitar package was very alluring to me. The hardware wasn't that eccentric; just two humbuckers
and a Tune-o-matic, but the tone and style was unique; I had never seen an offset body used for a semi-hollow,
nor had I seen the likes of a stepdown headstock. The tone was unique too: because the body was separate from neck, the 
transfer of energy  between the neck and the body was different as opposed to a set neck, creating a different tone. 
However, in the hands of people like Jessica Dobson, the tone could shift, change, transform into something more.
I fell in love with it when I saw it first used by her.


Somehow, I just never seemed to be able to settle on one, so in college, I planned to make a cross between the two:
a Fender Starcaster with the hardware and color of a P93. It is a major challenge: if you look online for any information
regarding this guitar, there is little to none; the guitar was largely unsuccessful, so Fender had stopped producing them
altogether. You can find Fender Starcasters used, but for extremely high prices. The next best thing was a Squier
Starcaster, but I'm not a fan of the Squier humbuckers, Besides, I was hoping to treat this project as my magnum opus,
my biggest project yet before I leave the Makerspace.


Today I started with machining out the centerblock, top, and bottom. According to some documents and forums I read online,
the starcaster is a sandwich, much like a Thinline Telecaster. Ideally the sides would be bent, but I haven't been able
to get the tooling to make veneer, or the tooling to bend said veneer. Making a centerblock with the sides attached would
just be easier from a logistics standpoint.

{% include md/figure.html src=img_split width="30%" height="120%" figcaption="A split in the centerblock..."%}


Machining the centerblock wasn't hard; it's a one sided job, and the body isn't too thick. There were a couple things I found out:
- The router was connected to a shared outlet. It tripped a breaker in the middle of the cut. That might've been from me, 2 years ago.
- The centerblock is super fragile! It split at some point after the machining. Luckily, the split was clean and easy to fix.


After machining the centerblock, I had to machine the tops. Earlier, I had jointed a face by using a planer sled that allows me to move a piece
through the planer with shims. It yields a flatter result than surfacing it on the CNC, but only if you shim the piece properly.

{% include md/figure.html src=img_sled width="50%" height="120%"%}


I began to machine the underside of the top. I had used a 3D printer to print a top prototype prior to machining to get an idea of the topology, so I wasn't going in completely blind.

{% include md/figure.html src=img_prototype width="50%" height="120%"%}

This was pretty good, though it took really long--about 30 minutes for both a roughing and finishing pass. For future cuts, I may just stick to only a finishing pass; the delta is minimal

{% include md/figure.html src=img_top width="50%" height="120%"%}

<br>

This was all I could finish today; I started at 3:00 in the afternoon, and I ended at 10:00--a couple of hours after my shift ended.


Hopefully future updates aren't as jam-packed as this; I was trying to fit in a lot of work that I had missed due to COVID.
