---
tags: ["makerspace", "raspberry pi"]
---
Trying to figure out how to build custom pi images seems to be proving very difficult.

In order to pass this down, I'll try my best to note down this process.

Of course, it's in part because I am doing this on non-native hardware.

## Goals
My main goal with generating a custom image is to make a standard image that the Makerspace can use
for all the RPis that we use as IoT devices. There are a couple of configuration things I would like to have
normalized througout all of the pis.

- Standard initial user and password.
- `systemd-networkd` instead of `NetworkManager`
- SSH enabled by default, with default keys.
- Localization preconfigured.

Past that, I want to create variations of that initial image for different uses.
- Kiosk image, w/ barebones software to display chromium in kiosk mode.
- Webserver image, to host local web servers via nginx.
- Flask image, to host flask web applications.

## Step 1: Prerequisites
We need to do a couple of things before we can begin building the images
- Add qemu binfmt configs
- Enable the Network Block Driver module

### binfmt
`binfmt` simply stands for "Binary Format" as it is just a linux kernel feature that allows you to
define arbitrary binary formats and the instructions for their execution in certain applications, so to
speak. For this use, it's to run these architectures in a docker container that allows us to build pi 
images without needing to actually own a pi or some type of `arm64` computer.

On Arch, this is handled using `systemd-binfmt`. No need to mount `binfmt_misc`.

We can generate conf files using [`qemu-binfmt-conf.sh`](https://github.com/qemu/qemu/blob/master/scripts/qemu-binfmt-conf.sh).

### Network Block Driver module
Not sure what this is for in particular, but the docker container needs it in order to continue the installation.
My assumption is that it is used as a networked storage device beween the container and the host, not sure.

You can probe it via
```
# modprobe nbd
```

## Step 2: Initial Generation
`pi-gen` generates 6 stages (stage0-stage5), each stage representing a different complexity of the image.
There is a full description in the `README` of the project, but we can just list a tl;dr as follows:
- stage0 - Bootstrap: Generates a usable filesystem + installs rpi bootloader.
           APT + other required software is bootstrapped but not configured. Not a bootable stage.
- stage1 - True Minimal: Only installs/configures what is necessary for you to boot the system
           and install other software. This includes networking software.
- stage2 - Lite: Effectively the lite image that you are familiar with, with BT drivers, optimizations, etc.
- stage3 - Desktop Lite: Effectively a lite desktop image. Contains a display manager, UI enhancements,
           and some dev tools apparently.
- stage4 - Standard Raspbian: The standard, beginner-friendly 4GB image at this point.
- stage5 - Raspbian Full: Standard Raspbian with more software.

For the sake of development, we begin by generating all 6 stages. 
We can skip the latter stages after the first generation.
